Now we have the opportunity
to enjoy this edition that we’re
accustomed to of The Inside Story,
and it’s hosted by another instructor,
Brother Trent Lippold.
Enjoy it.
The past year has been a period of change
for all of Jehovah’s people.
We’ve had to show flexibility,
caution, and reasonableness.
Here at Gilead, for us too,
Class 150 has presented us with change.
For example, all the students of Class 150
are from or serving in the United States.
Five couples and one single brother
all serve in the circuit work.
That represents approximately
50 percent of the class.
Today we’re going to meet three couples
from different parts of the United States
and see how they learned
to cope with change in their lives
and how they, like the apostle Paul,
worked to ‘become all things to all people.’
So let’s meet our first guests,
Joey and Taylor Bornschein,
from the state of Texas.
Joey and Taylor, welcome to The Inside Story.
Thank you.
You’re from the big state of Texas.
Where specifically are you from?
From Dallas.
Dallas, Texas.
All right.
Well, again, nice to have you with us.
You know, to come to Gilead
(here you are in the 150th class),
it all starts with regular pioneering.
So how did you both start regular pioneering?
Maybe, Joey, how did you start?
So for me,
I feel very grateful that my foundation
started a long time ago with my family,
especially with my grandparents.
They were the couple
that after they got married,
really just wanted to serve Jehovah
the best way they could.
They would ask circuit overseers
where they could move that needed help.
If they were ever asked
to go to another congregation,
they would always do it right away.
And so that really affected my mom,
which in turn affected me.
How did that affect you?
So for a while after my parents got married,
they might have just gotten
a little distracted with marriage,
family, taking care of the family.
But at one point,
they made a move across the country,
and they used that
as an opportunity to simplify.
And my mom was able to start
regular pioneering at that time.
And I just— I remember as a child
how different both of my parents were,
just in their happiness
and in life in general
because they were able
to do more for Jehovah.
Nice.
How old were you when that happened,
when your mom started pioneering
and you saw this change?
I was about nine.
OK.
And so when did you start
regular pioneering then?
So, actually, the next year
my sister and I
both got to join her in pioneering.
So you were 10 years old?
Yeah.
That is amazing!
Thank you.
Ten years old when you started pioneering?
Great!
What about you, Taylor?
How did you get your start
in regular pioneering?
So we pioneered in Texas,
but I’m originally from Colorado.
So my parents, like Joey’s,
set a really good example for me.
Most of my life they pioneered as a couple.
And so pioneering was always just something
—full-time service was something—
that I grew up with.
When I was in my mid-teens,
my parents got appointed
to the substitute circuit work.
So that was fun.
On the weekends, I would travel with them
to visit congregations.
I was in public schools,
so I couldn’t go with them during the week.
And I appreciated about them
that it wasn’t just what they said,
but they set the example by what they did.
OK.
I mean, that must have been cool.
You had your parents,
and they were in the substitute circuit work.
But personally, how did that affect you?
Yeah, so that was just some good motivation
for me to start pioneering.
I graduated about six months early,
a semester early,
and then started pioneering.
And then as soon as I was able to, I hit 19
and submitted an application for Bethel,
and soon thereafter
I was accepted and was able to spend
a few years in Brooklyn.
OK.
After that, I know you left Bethel.
The two of you got married.
You’re there regular pioneering in Dallas.
What made the difference for you to reach out
and progress in Jehovah’s service?
So we were pioneering as a young couple.
We had goals,
but it can be hard when you’re new
and trying to figure marriage out
with some distractions
or with maybe even just knowing
what direction you should take.
So we just feel so thankful to Jehovah
that we had some
very instrumental circuit overseer couples
that came just at the right time.
We’ve tried to express it to them,
but I don’t think
they’ll ever fully understand
the impact that they’ve had on our lives.
Well, that is one of the great things
about the impact
of those in the circuit work: what they do
for young people, for young ones.
And we’re all—
I think we’re all so grateful for that.
Would you say then—?
Was that your inspiration
to get into the circuit work?
Not really.
We actually had different goals.
We really wanted to go
to Bethel together as a couple,
so we applied and applied,
and it just didn’t seem to happen.
But you ended up in the circuit work.
So I wonder what changed then.
Did it just grow on you, or what happened?
Well, one day we opened up a piece of mail,
and it was a questionnaire
for the substitute circuit work.
So while that might not
have been the direction
that we thought we would go down,
it seemed like that was the path
that Jehovah laid out in front of us.
So we happily accepted, and little by little
it started to grow on us
—the idea of the circuit work.
We were then able to attend
the School for Kingdom Evangelizers.
We just continued
to get training and motivation
to do what Jehovah wanted us to do.
And so after our graduation,
within just a few months,
we were appointed to the circuit work,
and we love the circuit work.
Where was your first circuit, Joey?
So we went to the suburbs of Chicago,
so it was great—from the big city of Dallas
to the big city of Chicago.
What did you think of Chicago?
It was everything
that I could want in a circuit
—so two big-city people from Dallas
now going to Chicago, an even bigger city.
We love diversity of background,
culture, race, and it had everything.
So we were just eating it up.
We loved being in the Chicago area.
It sounds like a “but” is coming—a change.
What changed for you both?
So after just about six months
of being in that circuit
and still falling in love
with the circuit work, we got a call
from the branch office that we were
now being reassigned
to a different circuit farther north
and a more rural circuit in Wisconsin.
OK, Wisconsin.
Well, what did you think?
Tell us about it.
What was Wisconsin like for you, Taylor?
So it was very different for big-city people
going into a rural circuit that was
mostly dairy-farm communities.
So, out of our element,
we would drive for miles and miles
when we were out in service
with no stores or shops
or bathrooms or coffee shops.
So it took a little getting used to.
Probably, timing now
became something you had to learn.
Good.
What about for you, Joey, coming from Dallas,
what was it like for you?
For me, the big change was the weather
—the winters.
We didn’t have extreme winters in Dallas,
and Wisconsin had very long,
very cold winters.
So we invested in really good coats,
wool leggings, great boots.
I jokingly told Taylor
that some mornings I would wake up
and feel exhausted
just getting dressed in the morning.
Putting on so much, I guess, also affected
bathroom breaks and things like that
—new skills you were learning in Wisconsin.
Right.
What helped you to adjust to this new change?
So although it was a different environment,
it was just beautiful to see that, yeah,
it was cold outside, but that didn’t affect
the friends, their hearts.
They were warm in their service to Jehovah.
They were so warm in the way
that they treated us.
They just adopted us so quickly
into a different environment.
We very, very quickly fell in love
with the friends in Wisconsin.
Jehovah’s people are amazing, aren’t they?
What about you, Joey?
What would you say helped you to adjust?
Well, of course, like Taylor said,
the love from the friends;
it helped us immediately.
But we also actually learned new ways
to have fun that we never had in Dallas.
Yeah, you brought a picture.
This photograph is a great picture.
You’re obviously having fun there.
Joey, what can you tell us about it?
So this is actually
a gathering that we went to
on the middle of a frozen lake,
and this is actually us ice fishing.
Did you catch anything?
We did.
You’re telling yourself,
‘You’re not in Dallas anymore.’
Right.
Great!
There’s also another photo,
and I love this one.
What can you tell us about this, Taylor?
So there’s a brother in the circuit
who raised beef cattle,
so I got to spend some time getting to pet
the little guy and also hand-feeding it
—so an amazing experience and not
something that I would have been able to do
in downtown Chicago or downtown Dallas.
You were really there,
just ‘becoming all things to all people.’
What would you say you learned
from the changes
you’ve gone through in your lives?
So if I’m just being honest, the circuit work
was not something that I had a desire to do.
I didn’t feel like it would make me
comfortable or happy.
But Jehovah at times
puts things in front of us
that we might not think
that we would like or make us comfortable.
But it does.
And I’m so glad that he did allow us
to have the opportunity
to be in the circuit work
because we love the circuit work.
So it’s just a nice little reminder
that Jehovah will choose things for us
or put things in front of us
that maybe we don’t think
is going to make us happy
or is not going to make us
comfortable in how we
feel with the circumstance or environment.
But Jehovah always chooses
what’s best for us if we just let him do it.
What would you say, Joey?
What did you learn?
I think for me, anytime there’s a change
there’s always going to be
a little bit of anxiety,
uncertainties, worries.
I just really learned to just leave it
in Jehovah’s hands
—to pray to him about it—
because a lot of times those things
never even happen; they never even come true.
So whatever Jehovah asks of us,
we will be able to get through it
because either they won’t happen
or Jehovah will help us
and bless us through them.
Those are two great lessons
that you’ve learned.
Thank you so much for sharing them with us,
and those are two lessons
that will probably help you out
in the changes that are to come in your life.
Taylor and Joey, thank you so much
for being with us on The Inside Story.
Thank you.
Let’s welcome our next guests
coming from the state of Michigan,
Ben and Whitney Frey.
Ben and Whitney, thank you for being
with us on The Inside Story.
You’ve come to Gilead from the circuit work,
and the circuit work also starts
with regular pioneering.
So maybe you can tell us: How did you,
Whitney, start regular pioneering?
So my mom taught me the truth
when I was growing up.
And I loved Jehovah,
but by my late teens, I didn’t really know
what I wanted to do with my life.
I had a girlfriend who invited me
to support her at a funeral
of a young brother
who had passed away in a tragic accident.
That’s interesting.
Maybe you could make—
What’s the connection of starting
to pioneer and a funeral?
Maybe you can make the connection for us.
Yeah.
So for me, when I got to the funeral
of this young brother,
even though I didn’t know him personally,
I had seen
that he had just started regular pioneering
and that he had the goal of going
to Bethel when he got old enough.
And I just compared his life to mine.
He was going to give everything
he had to Jehovah.
And I had the circumstances
to do the same thing, but I wasn’t doing it.
And so I just thought, you know,
‘He didn’t get to finish his story.’
So I wanted to pick up where he left off.
I wanted to start pioneering.
And so when I went home,
I prayed about it and I turned in
my auxiliary pioneer application
with the goal
of starting to regular in September.
Well, that’s really encouraging
—something so tragic
and yet something
very positive came out of it.
What about you, Ben?
How did you get your start?
So, similar to Whitney,
my mother taught me the truth.
My dad was not in the truth during my youth.
I grew up
in a rural congregation in Michigan,
and while I respected the truth
in my late teens and early 20’s,
I struggled spiritually.
And the reason is
because I wanted a lot out of life
and, at that point,
the truth felt very restrictive to me.
It felt like it was holding me back
and not allowing me
to get the rich life that I wanted.
What changed in your life then?
What helped you?
We had a couple of pioneer elders
move into our congregation
who were a great source
of encouragement to me.
They helped me to see that serving Jehovah
is not about what you can’t  do;
it’s about all the things you can  do.
And the way I illustrate it is
with a board game.
If all you did was just learn
the rules of that game
but you never played it,
that wouldn’t be a lot of fun.
And that’s really how my view
was at that time of the truth.
I knew the rules, so to speak, of the truth.
I respected the truth,
but I wasn’t involved in it.
So with the encouragement
of these two brothers, I really got involved.
I started playing the game, so to speak,
and I started studying the Bible
like I should have all along.
And then I also started
regular pioneering shortly thereafter.
Nice.
Well, we’re happy you “got in the game.”
Was there anything else, Whitney,
that helped you
or maybe inspired you to reach out?
Yeah, when I started wanting to pioneer,
I also got into studying more.
And one thing that really affected me
was the video To the Ends of the Earth.
I remember watching it and,
as I watched it, thinking: ‘That’s it.
‘That’s what I want to do.
I want to go to Gilead,
and I want to be a missionary.’
Very nice.
Well, that video is still available
on jw.org in the video library.
And that video probably, like for you,
inspired hundreds of people to reach out
and enter missionary service
and attend Gilead.
And many of them are still out there
strengthening and stabilizing
the brotherhood.
So you both then had
the goal of foreign service
—missionary service.
Did you keep pursuing that goal?
Yeah, we certainly did.
After we got married, six months later,
we served where the need was great
in the country of Guyana in South America.
Nice.
And you brought along a couple of pictures.
Maybe you can explain these.
Well, the first one
is obviously your photo, Ben.
What can you tell us?
So we were motivated by the motorbike scene
in the To the Ends of the Earth  video.
So we got a motorbike when we were down there
—not quite as big or as cool as the one
in the To the Ends of the Earth  video,
but it served its purpose.
We were able to travel
the territory efficiently
to our different Bible studies
and return visits.
Good.
And the next photo
—what can you tell us about it, Whitney?
So when the bike
couldn’t take us any farther,
we would park it and then we walked.
And a lot of times,
that meant through mud across the trenches.
But we didn’t mind.
It was fun.
We were enjoying it.
So Ben is being careful on the bridge.
Yeah, you had to be careful
because there were black caiman,
which is a form of alligator,
that was in those trenches,
so you chose your steps carefully.
Sure.
Well, I know you came back from Guyana.
Did you continue to pursue Gilead?
We did.
Once we returned to the United States
after serving in Guyana,
we applied for Gilead, and to our surprise,
we were invited to serve as special pioneers
in the state of West Virginia
here in the United States.
OK, so did Gilead remain your goal, though,
even though you were there in West Virginia?
It did.
We continued to apply for Gilead,
but then instead we were invited
to the Bible School for Christian Couples.
Very nice
—so more theocratic education, though.
Uh-huh.
And from there you returned to West Virginia?
That’s correct.
So we continued special pioneering
in West Virginia,
and we also got training for circuit work.
Good.
Did you end up in the circuit work?
So we were invited to start circuit work
in the Milwaukee, Wisconsin, area
similar (close by) to the Bornscheins.
And we loved it.
We loved the friends there,
and we loved that circuit.
Nice.
But, of course, change came
—didn’t it?—a big change for you.
Yeah.
So one day Ben came home.
We’d been there about four years.
We were loving it.
And he came home and told me
that we got field missionary applications.
There it is—foreign service.
So how did you feel?
Ben, how did you feel?
At that point in our life,
we were really enjoying
the circuit work and we loved the friends.
So admittedly at that point,
the idea of now going foreign
and having another change
maybe lost a bit of its luster.
And we had gotten so comfortable that we had
potentially gotten too comfortable.
What about you, Whitney?
Yeah, I thought, you know:
‘It had always been my goal.
‘But now, Jehovah?
‘Now after I got into circuit work
and am enjoying it,
now you want me to go foreign?’
So, what helped you?
So we were explaining what was happening
and talking to my family
and telling them how we felt.
I was talking to my sister
and my brother-in-law,
and he said, “You know, Whit, you feel like
you got trained for circuit work,
but maybe circuit work
was training you for the next assignment.”
And just shifting my thoughts
in that way really helped me.
Yeah.
That’s great advice.
What about you, Ben?
Was there something in particular
that helped you?
There was.
I spoke with a brother
in the Service Department at Bethel,
and he said that ones in our situation
come across his desk frequently.
And he said: “You’re at a crossroads.
“And there are some
who turn down the opportunity
to accept this form of foreign service.”
He said, “But for those that accept it,
“who take that step of faith,
“they receive blessings that they
could never have imagined from Jehovah.”
And we can rightly say
that has been completely accurate.
We feel exactly that way.
Well, it shows.
So you went off to a foreign assignment.
You continued in circuit work there.
What would you say, Whitney?
How did foreign service help you?
In so many ways.
But a couple of them are
just getting to express our faith and trust
in Jehovah in a way
that we never would have if we didn’t go.
And one of the greatest gifts
was the people that we met
—the local brothers and sisters,
our fellow missionaries,
and circuit overseers.
Their faith and self-sacrifice
taught us so much.
Beautiful.
And now you’ve come to Gilead.
How has Gilead training helped you?
Again, in so many ways.
While we loved our foreign assignment,
it did have challenges.
And I remember praying to Jehovah,
asking him for help
with certain things that I struggled with.
And the first week that we were here
in Gilead, I saw the answer
to those prayers
—specific things that I had prayed about—
answered right in week one,
and it never stopped since.
Yeah.
And I’m sure Gilead training
will just keep helping you in the future.
You said at the outset, Ben,
that you wanted to get a lot out of life.
And I think we would all agree:
You’ve gotten a lot out of life
—both of you so far.
And maybe in the next 30 minutes,
you’ll find out
just how much more out of life
you’re going to get.
Thank you both for being with us
on The Inside Story.
Thank you.
Let’s welcome our final guests.
They’re also serving in the United States.
It’s Joshua and Solaydi Rechanek.
Josh and Solaydi, welcome.
It’s nice to have you.
You’re our final guests
on The Inside Story  for today,
and I should clarify that although you’re
serving in the United States,
you are actually from Puerto Rico, correct?
That’s right.
It’s a beautiful tropical island
in the Caribbean.
So my mom and dad moved there
before I was born to serve,
and that’s where I was raised.
And they were a tremendous example
for entering full-time service for me,
because when I was one,
they actually started in the circuit work.
So it’s just that from a very young age,
it just seemed very natural to have that
as a goal, and I’m very grateful.
OK, Solaydi, were you also born
and raised in Puerto Rico?
That is right.
I have an older brother, Rafi,
and we both were raised by our mom,
Lydia, as a single parent.
She raised us in the truth,
and a little bit
after Joshua came to our congregation,
I started to pioneer.
And also I had the privilege
to serve as a commuter
in the Puerto Rico branch,
but we were happy
to have him in our congregation.
But something happened.
OK, before we get to what happened,
we have a nice photograph.
There it is.
So that’s you with your mom, Solaydi?
Yeah, that’s my mom, Lydia.
So, Josh, just to clarify this also,
how did you get to Solaydi’s congregation?
So after I started pioneering,
I went to what was called
the Ministerial Training School in 2003,
and after a little bit, I got assigned
to this lovely rural congregation,
where I just happened to meet
a very beautiful sister.
I like the way you say lovely congregation.
But a change came.
You said, Solaydi, that something changed.
What changed?
Well, I had gotten some training
as a substitute circuit overseer,
and then there was
a need for a circuit overseer.
But it wasn’t in Puerto Rico;
it was in a Spanish circuit in Ohio.
And so I prayed about it,
and off I went from Puerto Rico to Ohio.
What was that like, Josh?
Tell us about it.
How did you feel when you got there?
I was— It was very different.
I remember dropping my dad off at the airport
(because he helped me move up),
and then when I was driving away, I said,
“I know nobody and nothing
even nearby after that plane takes off.”
Because not only was the place different
but also everything was different.
It’s very interesting
because the congregations
in the U.S. in Spanish
tend to be very mixed culturally.
And so I got to be with brothers
from many different cultures
that I hadn’t experienced before.
I even had to learn to speak Spanish
in a way that everybody would understand
instead of just the brothers
from Puerto Rico.
So that’s a huge change for you
—a change of culture coming
to the United States and then,
as you say, all these other cultures.
You brought along
a really nice picture, Josh.
What can you tell us about this?
I learned this day a very important skill,
which is to check the weather report
before you leave home to preach.
Right.
Do you not check the weather in Puerto Rico?
Nope.
It’s either going to be sunny,
or it’s going to rain.
Two choices.
Interesting.
What about you, Solaydi?
So Josh has come to the United States.
How did that affect you?
Well, I was happy for the assignment.
It was a privilege,
so I wanted to support him.
So we kept in touch.
And in 2010, we got married.
And after that, we received an invitation
to continue as a couple in Ohio.
Well, that’s a big change for you then.
Again, just like Josh,
you came to a new country, in a sense,
a new marriage,
and a new assignment in circuit work.
What were some of the hard moments for you?
Maybe, Josh, you could share first.
Well, as I said,
there was a lot of adaptation.
When you start a new assignment,
I don’t think you ever really feel
qualified for it or prepared for it.
And so we were very young
when we started the circuit work,
visiting congregations where sometimes
there were brothers that had been serving
as regular pioneers
longer than we’d been alive.
And then all of a sudden,
we’d have the responsibility
to encourage them and help them.
So that could be a bit intimidating.
Sure.
And you brought along another photo.
You can see the confusion of the adaptation.
What can you tell us about this, Josh?
So this was a field service day
shortly after getting married.
And it wasn’t that I was distracted
or anything, but we rushed out the door,
went to field service, took the group out,
and made all the arrangements.
And then a dear brother,
a very good friend, came up to me,
and he put his arm around my shoulder,
and he took me over to Solaydi.
And he said: “I’m not going to say anything.
I’m just going to look.”
And he looked down at my shoes,
and, well, it just turned out that I had
put two different shoes on.
And he was kind enough
to point that out before I went out in service.
But he didn’t point it out
before he took the picture.
Of course.
Solaydi, what were you thinking?
I was like: “Baby, what happened?
What did you do?”
So you always check his shoes
before he goes out then.
Yes, I try to check him before leaving home.
But maybe in all seriousness, Josh,
what would you say were the keys
that helped you?
I got some really good advice
from brothers with more experience,
including my father.
And there are really two keys we found.
One is to love the brothers,
because that’s really what they need.
They need love and affection and your time.
And the other is to be humble,
because the brothers greatly appreciate
the arrangement of the circuit overseer,
whoever the circuit overseer is.
So as long as you remain humble,
Jehovah can use you
to encourage the friends
and then all glory goes to him.
It’s very nice to love humility,
and that’s really what helps us
to “become all things to [all] people.”
What about for you, Solaydi?
What were challenges for you?
Well, for me it was the emotional part.
Because it is true:
It is a beautiful privilege
to be able to know
so many brothers and sisters
and make bonds with them,
but at the same time, you face reality.
You see all the struggles
that they are going through.
So some are dealing with health problems
or economic problems
or even their status in the country.
So I was not able to help them
in the way that I wanted, so I felt helpless.
So, what could you do for them?
So I had to leave that part
in Jehovah’s hands and give them my time.
So I try to go
with them in service, try to encourage them.
Sometimes we laugh, sometimes we cry,
but I try to show them my love
—and even more important
that Jehovah loves them.
Nice.
Well, I’m sure you left a little bit
of your heart with all of them.
That’s very nice.
Now you’re here in Gilead.
Was that a surprise for you?
Yes, a big surprise.
And, Josh, I know Gilead actually has
a special place in your heart.
Why is that?
It does.
It’s because my parents attended Gilead,
and that’s actually what brought them
to Puerto Rico.
They attended the 52nd class.
Right.
Good.
So having parents who went to Gilead,
did they
keep Gilead in their heart even after they
had a family and were raising you?
They did.
Absolutely.
I remember they had their graduation photo
up in the hallway, where all of us
would walk every day.
So every day of my life growing up
I walked past that photo.
There it is, the 52nd class.
That’s them.
And also the way they were,
the way they served Jehovah,
the love and zeal that they have:
It’s clear to me—even clearer now—
that Gilead had a big impact on them.
What would you say that impact was on them?
How did you see Gilead training in them?
I think of two things.
One is that they’re excellent students
of the Bible and always have been.
My mom’s Bible has so many notes
that I don’t think it can hold any more.
And my dad, I remember he would be reading
the Bible with us at night,
and he had an envelope that he’d mark
the family Bible with.
And all of a sudden he’d stop reading
and stop to make a note on the envelope
because he came across a scripture
that he wanted to use for a talk
or a shepherding call
or just a point that he liked.
So that was an excellent example.
And also they’ve always worked
very, very hard for Kingdom interests.
They’ve always had the goal to do as much
as they can for as long as they can,
and that just kind of became
the family motto.
So it’s interesting now going through Gilead
and seeing so much emphasis
placed on exactly those things
—to feed your love for Jehovah and do
as much as you can for the organization.
Yeah, I was going to ask you that as well.
Here you are sitting in class,
and you’re hearing
to a great degree
the same things your parents heard.
Has that helped you at all?
It has.
They must have had those qualities
to an extent when they came to Gilead.
But I think, listening to the classes now,
it’s clear that Gilead
stirred that up in them
and kept that flame burning
for many, many years.
That’s beautiful.
And they must be very proud of both of you
as you apply yourselves
and as you will apply the training
and look forward to applying it
in your future assignments.
Thank you both very much
for being with us today.
Thank you.
In the introduction, we quoted Paul’s words
at 1 Corinthians 9:22.
He said: “I have become all things
to people of all sorts,
so that I might
by all possible means save some.”
The apostle obligated himself
to adjust his life
and personal tastes
“for the sake of the good news.”
We hope today’s program
has been encouraging to you,
whether it’s trying something
you just don’t prefer
or something you didn’t think
you could do in Jehovah’s service.
Maybe it’s just getting in the game,
so to speak,
or giving someone a little piece
of your heart to encourage them.
Today’s guests have shown us
that by adjusting our life
and personal tastes for the sake
of the good news,
with Jehovah, we can cope with any change
or make any change for Jehovah’s service.
Thank you for being with us,
and we look forward to seeing you
on another edition of The Inside Story.